---
title: "How many participants do you need for a usability test?"
date: "2025-07-29"
---

Jacob Nielsen had published on his site an article suggesting that 5 users are enough to uncover most of the problems in an interface when user testing. But there has been quite a lot of research on this subject. Over st the measuring usability.com site by Jeff Sauro you can read A bried History of the Magic Number 5 in usability testingto find a pretty well laid out chronology on the research.

One thing to note about the Nielsen's findings, if you read the article, he is not actually saying you should test with 5 users just once. He recommends doing several series of tests with 5 users each time as you evolve your design. He also has recommendations on how many you should test if there is more than one user type/persona for the software or a website. So it is better to take an iterativ approach with your user testing rather than do a lot od users in one round. Formal user testing is expensive and you would be wise to structure your test plan to strategically test with the fewest number of users you need to make sure you get the best design for your money.

I think the main issue for determining how many users you test besides your budget is your organisation's capacity for incorporating changes based on the findings. It's unfortunate, but true that some organizations will spend the time and effort to test with users and then 
turn around and do little or nothing to mitigate the findings. so before embarking on any user testing, it is very improtant to verify that the changes canbe made
regardless of what stage in the design or implementation process the testing is being performed.

If you are testing in the early stages with the UX prototypes then hopefully you have included time in your own schedule to make changes to the UX specifications.
Ideally you would do several rounds of testing as a best practise. If it is an alpha or a beta program in development, then you need to be sure that product owners and 
development are prepared and have left room in the schedule to work on changes based on the findings from usability sessions.
In fact, if they have ittle time for changes the testing with only a few users is enough to uncover any major problems that you will have to advocate getting fixed.

Another great resource I found over on the measuringusability.com site is his explanation of the base equation for deriving a problem discovery sample size. Thee is an 
excellent table at the end of the article which crosses indexes how many particpants are accepted for commonly accepted rates of probability you will uncover usability issues that affect a certain percentage of users.
These are calculated using the formula N = Log(x) / log (p), where N is the numberof participants needed and p is the probability of detecting those problems experienced by x percentage of users (if I understood it correctly).

Unless you are working on a high risk application, the most common usage is to be 80 to 85% sure of finding problem thst affect 25 to 30% of users... Which works out to about 5-7 users as indicated by Nielsen. He also makes note that you would need representative users for each persona that you may have for a website. Additionaly for early stages of UX design, it may be enough to test with only a few users in several rounds each.
Note this would still be a total of 9-12 different users as you would not use the same participants in subsequent rounds.

Generally, it seems it may be a waste of time and effort to test a single UI ith more than 7 users at one time. The exception to this of course when you need to test in multiple international regiond or you are doing a summative test where you want to get as thorough as you can get in identifying as many usablity issues as possible. 
Then you may want to crack out the formula above and determine what number you need... which ultimately will be affected by waht you can afford and the capacity of your team to make changes as well.
